+++
authors = ["Jake Fecher"]
title = "Avoiding Lifetime Variables"
date = "2024-01-30"
categories = ["lifetimes", "memory management", "type inference"]
banner = "img/banners/anteater2.jpg"
+++

---

# Introduction

---

Programming with references in Rust can be tedious at times. One of the worst examples is when you've
written a large, recursive tree walk only to discover near the end that you need to go back and parameterize
a context type with a lifetime parameter. From there, you'll also need to go back and parameterize every
function that uses this context with the same lifetime parameter and match it to any required references.
This would also be the same process for adding any generic parameter on a type after the fact, but anecdotaly
I've never remember needing to do this aside from adding lifetime variables in my entire career. It seems
like a problem unique to lifetime variables - or perhaps my intuition on when I'll need to add them in
advance is lacking.

Either way, removing lifetime variables also removes something new users would have to otherwise learn.
Can we remove lifetime variables while still tracking ownership & borrowing constraints without too
much complexity?

This has been one of Ante's core goals for quite a while now. Originally, my solution
was to experiment with a somewhat forgotten field of research called region inference (lifetime inference).
I had some ideas on how to improve the lifetimes inferred by the various papers I read on
the subject, but there remained a core problem to the idea: lifetime-inferred references need to own their
contained value. Without getting into the details too much, a lifetime-inferred reference has the ability
to automatically extend its own lifetime when needed (e.g. when returned from a function). To do this,
it can't be referring to a temporary value that may be moved out from under itself. It needs to be an
owning pointer.

So lifetime inference does not solve the problem of checking borrowed references without lifetime variables
because they're inherently not borrwed references. For a while I thought about what to do instead, but
I now believe the best approach here is for Ante to adopt second-class references.

---
## Relevant Blog Posts

Before explaining Ante's specific version of second-class references, I'll
note that second-class references were originally pushed for by Graydon Hoare for Rust over the first
class references that it has today. This was noted in the article [The Rust I Wanted Had No Future](https://graydon2.dreamwidth.org/307291.html)
which is also full of other interesting design notes for Rust and the conflicting desires of its different developers.

Another fantastic blog post is [this one](https://borretti.me/article/second-class-references) specifically on
second-class references and what sacrifices Rust would have to take if it had adopted them. That post also
likely serves as a better introduction to second-class references than this post will be. Although I hope
to introduce the concept in full here as well, it will be tailored more towards Ante's specific version of
them rather than e.g. those implemented by [Hylo](https://www.hylo-lang.org/) (formerly Val).

---
# Second-Class References

Second-class references are references which are not "first class" types in the language. Most notably,
this means they cannot be stored within other types. Instead, they are a glorified parameter passing mode.

    The overwhelming majority of references are just arguments to functions.
    Sometimes you see a reference being returned from a function.
    Rarely, very rarely, are references stored in structs, and often the lifetime is 'static.


---

## Returning References

No "subscript" functions.

---

## Closures

Also not first class...
